---

Headline: In this S.F. Facebook group, neighbors give away their stuff for free

URL: /sf-buy-nothing

Social media post: In this Facebook group, there are no bartering or trades. No payments. Just pure, unadulterated gifting via social media.

---

Two fuzzy, new-with-tags, his-and-hers bathrobes. Half a dozen bags of cat food, rejected by a picky feline after just a few scoops. A baby bottle sterilizer that “still works great” but might benefit from some descaling. A large bundle of freshly gathered rosemary branches. A box of 58 mismatched glasses collected for a wedding, perfect “if matchy-matchy isn’t your vibe.”

Where can one find such a hodgepodge of items, completely free?

Buy Nothing San Francisco.

For the uninitiated, the Facebook group is a marketplace of unwanted items being offered sans charge — the digital version of putting something out on the curb with a “free” sign.

Users post photos and descriptions of what they no longer want and anyone in the group can claim it. Others post items they’re “in search of,” hoping to save themselves an Amazon order by jogging their neighbors’ memories of what’s languishing in their closets or garages. No bartering or trades. No payments. Just pure, unadulterated gifting via social media.

The idea is to avoid waste and unnecessary spending by shuffling items between neighbors. In a Buy Nothing utopia, a neighborhood would share the same set of baby shower decorations over and over; a coffee table would pass through dozens of homes (but never Goodwill) as residents move in and out.

The “Buy Nothing” concept was created in Washington state in 2013 by Liesl Clark and Rebecca Rockefeller, who formalized it as the Buy Nothing Project. They say they originally hoped Buy Nothing groups, which were hosted on Facebook from the beginning, would reduce plastic waste by encouraging reuse.

In the decade since, the concept has exploded and spread. The Buy Nothing directory lists groups in more than 40 countries and hundreds in California. These groups follow a fleshed-out set of guidelines, including the types of gifts permitted (i.e. gifts of self, talent or stuff), practicing patience and limiting networks to hyper-local communities. Thus, there are 18 groups listed in San Francisco alone: one for Bayview / Hunters Point, Central Richmond, Inner Richmond, SoMa, the Castro, and so on. Recently, the Buy Nothing Project founders have tried to shift communities away from Facebook and onto a proprietary app — without much success.

But a quick search on Facebook reveals many more groups, which have split away from the official Buy Nothing Project. Some connect gifters across the city, some are “no rules” communities anyone can join, and some are devoted to specific types of giveaways, like kids’ stuff or Burner paraphernalia. 

The oldest is Buy Nothing San Francisco. Moderators enforce a separate set of guidelines, but the basic ethos is the same: No exchanging money or goods — only free gifts are allowed among the group’s 24,000 members. All exchanges must take place in San Francisco, and posts offering illegal items, drugs and live animals are banned. In addition to a few rules governing good behavior and civility, the guidelines promise that members are free to give however and to whomever they want.

Julia Pfeiffenberger created the group in 2016 and still administers it. The group grew so much during the pandemic that Pfeiffenberger and other moderators decided to stop accepting new members and focus only on maintaining the existing community. 

In addition to an influx of members suddenly stuck at home with their stuff and more time to surf the internet, the pandemic also brought more posts in search of food and other basic necessities. Pfeiffenberger saw members rally to support their struggling neighbors. Today, she still notices people going out of their way to deliver food or help a home-bound neighbor do laundry (members can request services, too).

“The group’s members show the promise of the circular economy,” Pfeiffenberger said, referencing an economic model centered on reusing materials as much as possible. “It’s not perfect; there are still hiccups with pick-up and drop-off coordination. But members value community, ecology and the economy.”

Liz Cahill, a Buy Nothing aficionado, shares Pfeiffenberger’s belief in the power of the concept. She’s been a member of Buy Nothing San Francisco since 2021 and created a separate clothing-focused group, Free Clothing San Francisco, earlier this year. She recently posted in search of a warmer duvet and plans to give away her current bedding once a cozier blanket is secured.

“It can feel demoralizing to see news about climate change and division across the country,” Cahill said, “but when you have spaces online for giving and receiving, you see a different narrative. It’s wonderful to see community building online and people getting their needs met by their neighbors.”

What are those needs? The Chronicle examined a week’s worth of activity to see what people were giving and receiving. We found that Buy Nothing S.F. members made about 70 posts a day, 75% of which gave items away. Many posts offered multiple items, adding up to over 300 cast-offs gifted each day.

Occasionally, the group creates real-life miracles fit for a local news segment: a family down on their luck receiving Christmas toys from more prosperous homes across the city; a dozen accidentally-ordered frozen turkeys passed out by Thanksgiving; a desperate search for a concert ticket, unexpectedly fulfilled. 

But mostly, the group is a steady stream of mundane munificence.